# Testing project creation via API

In this lesson, your challenge is to test the project creation scenario (via API) successfully.

## Exercise 1 - Creating a project via API

Create an automated test that exercises project creation functionality via _Application Programming Interface (API)_.

### Useful information about the API

- The relative _endpoint_ for creating projects is `/api/v4/projects/`
- The verb for project creation is `POST`
- The attributes that must be passed in the `body` of the request are: `name` (String), `description` (String) and `initialize_with_readme` (Boolean)
- An authorization token (`Authorization`) must be passed in the `headers`, prefixed by `Bearer `
- After successful project creation, the request response status should be `201`.

<details><summary>If in doubt, open to see the step-by-step</summary>
</br>

1. Inside the `cypress/e2e/` directory, create a new directory called `api/`

2. Inside the `cypress/e2e/api/` directory, create a file called `createProject.cy.js` with the following data:

```js
import { faker } from '@faker-js/faker/locale/en'

describe("Create Project", () => {
  it("successfully", () => {
    const project = {
      name: `project-${faker.datatype.uuid()}`,
      description: faker.random.words(5),
    }

    cy.api_createProject(project).then((response) => {
      expect(response.status).to.equal(201)
      expect(response.body.name).to.equal(project.name)
      expect(response.body.description).to.equal(project.description)
    })
  })
})

```

3. Inside the `cypress/support/` directory, create a file called `api_commands.js`, with the following data:

```js
const accessToken = `Bearer ${Cypress.env("gitlab_access_token")}`

Cypress.Commands.add("api_createProject", (project) => {
  cy.request({
    method: "POST",
    url: `/api/v4/projects/`,
    body: {
      name: project.name,
      description: project.description,
      initialize_with_readme: true,
    },
    headers: { Authorization: accessToken },
  })
})

```

4. Inside the `cypress/support/` directory, add to the `e2e.js` file the import of the `api_commands.js` file, as follows:

```js
import "./api_commands"
import "./gui_commands"

```

5. Finally, via the Cypress App, run the `cypress/e2e/api/createProject.cy.js` test.

> Notice how project creation via API is much faster.
>
> However, whenever this, or the `cypress/e2e/gui/createProject.cy.js` and `cypress/e2e/gui/createIssue.cy.js` tests are run, we leave "junk" behind.
>
> That is, projects that are created for testing purposes, which are never deleted.
>
> 👨‍🏫 Let's sort this out?

</details>

## Exercise 2 - Data cleaning

Create a mechanism for cleaning up previously created projects so that all tests that create such a resource can start in a "clean" state.

### Useful information about the API

- The relative _endpoint_ to search for all projects is `/api/v4/projects/`
- The relative _endpoint_ for deleting projects is `/api/v4/projects/:projectId`
- The verb to search for projects is `GET`
- The verb for project deletion is `DELETE`
- For both _endpoints_, an authorization token (`Authorization`) must be passed in the `headers`, prefixed by `Bearer `

<details><summary>If in doubt, open to see the step-by-step</summary>
</br>

1. In the `cypress/support/api_commands.js` file, add the `api_getAllProjects` and `api_deleteProjects` commands, as shown below:

```js

const accessToken = `Bearer ${Cypress.env('gitlab_access_token')}`

Cypress.Commands.add('api_createProject', project => {
  ...
})

Cypress.Commands.add('api_getAllProjects', () => {
  cy.request({
    method: 'GET',
    url: '/api/v4/projects/',
    headers: { Authorization: accessToken },
  })
})

Cypress.Commands.add('api_deleteProjects', () => {
  cy.api_getAllProjects().then(res =>
    res.body.forEach(project => cy.request({
      method: 'DELETE',
      url: `/api/v4/projects/${project.id}`,
      headers: { Authorization: accessToken },
    }))
  )
})

```

2. Now, in the `cypress/e2e/api/createProject.cy.js` file, add the `beforeEach` function, calling the `cy.api_deleteProjects()` custom command in your _callback_ function, as below:

```js
import { faker } from '@faker-js/faker'

describe('Create issue', () => {
  beforeEach(() => cy.api_deleteProjects())

  it('successfully', () => {
    ...
  })
})

```

3. Via the Cypress App, run the `cypress/e2e/api/createProject.cy.js` test again and check the cleanup of previously created projects is happening

> Access the local environment and see that only one project should be available after running the test, as all others were cleaned up before running.

4. In the `cypress/e2e/gui/createProject.cy.js` and `cypress/e2e/gui/createIssue.cy.js` files, also add the call to the custom command `cy.api_deleteProjects()` before the call to the `cy.login()` command, ensuring that _GUI_ tests aren't leaving "garbage" behind either

5. Run both tests via the Cypress App to ensure both continue to work.

</details>

## Exercise 3 - Optimizing the GUI _issue_ creation process

Now that we can create projects via the API, update the _issue_ creation test via _GUI_ (since this depends on such a feature only as a precondition), so that such a test is as optimized as possible, passing through the _GUI_ only for what is really necessary, without the need for _over-testing_ (testing more than necessary).

<details><summary>If in doubt, open to see the step-by-step</summary>
</br>

1. Now that we can create a project via API, change the `cypress/e2e/gui/createIssue.cy.js` file, so instead of creating the project with the custom command `cy.gui_createProject(issue.project)`, use the command `cy.api_createProject(issue.project)`

2. Via the Cypress App, run the `cypress/e2e/gui/createIssue.cy.js` file.

> Note that now, in addition to the _login_ process, project creation (which is just a test precondition) is also optimized, occurring via an API call.
>
> That is a much faster process than creating a project via _GUI_. 🏎️
>
> Also, the project creation functionality via _GUI_ is already covered by another test, so doing it again via _GUI_ was a waste.

</details>

## Exercise 4 - Visual feedback from API tests

Configure the [`cypress-plugin-api`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/cypress-plugin-api) plugin (installed in [lesson 1](./1.md)) so that we have visual _feedback_ when we are running the API tests .

<details><summary>If in doubt, open to see the step-by-step</summary>
</br>

In [lesson 1](./1.md), in addition to installing `cypress` and `faker`, we also installed the _lib_ `cypress-plugin-api`.

With it, it is possible to have visual _feedback_ during the execution of API tests.

1. Change the `cypress/support/e2e.js` file as below:

```js
import "cypress-plugin-api"

import "./api_commands"
import "./gui_commands"

```

2. Change the `cypress.config.js` file as below:

```js
const { defineConfig } = require("cypress")

module.exports = defineConfig({
  e2e: {
    baseUrl: "http://localhost",
    env: {
      hideCredentials: true,
      requestMode: true,
    },
  },
  fixturesFolder: false,
  video: false,
})

```

3. Via the Cypress App, run the `cypress/e2e/api/createProject.cy.js` file again.

> See that now, we have visual _feedback_ of what is happening at the API call level. Fantastic, don't you think?
>
> Also, note that the access token (which is sensitive data) is protected 🔒, as we are using the `hideCredential: true` option, as a variable of the e2e tests, in the configuration file.
>
> Finally, we are using the `requestMode: true` option, also as a variable of the e2e tests in the configuration file so that such visual _feedback_ occurs even if we are using the `cy.request()` command, since by default, such _visual_feedback is only available for the `cy.api()` command, provided by the `cypress-plugin-api` library.
>
> You might have to close the Cypress App and start it again❗

</details>

## Exercise 5 - Visual feedback from GUI tests with API

In addition to visual _feedback_ for API tests, the _lib_ `cypress-plugin-api` makes it possible to combine API tests with _GUI_ tests. Read about the [`snapshot only mode`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/cypress-plugin-api#snapshot-only-mode) feature for more details.

Your exercise is to make use of this functionality (`snapshot only mode`), so that in the _GUI_ tests, we also have visual _feedback_ when API calls are running, or when we are using the functionality of [_time-traveling_](https://docs.cypress.io/guides/core-concepts/cypress-app#Time-traveling) from Cypress.

<details><summary>If in doubt, open to see the step-by-step</summary>
</br>

1. Add to the `describe` function of the `cypress/e2e/gui/createProject.cy.js` file (between the test description and the _callback_ function), an object, as shown below:

```js
import { faker } from '@faker-js/faker'

const options = { env: { snapshotOnly: true } }

describe('Create Project', options, () => {
  ...
})

```

2. Do the same for the `cypress/e2e/gui/createIssue.cy.js` file, as shown below:

```js
import { faker } from '@faker-js/faker'

const options = { env: { snapshotOnly: true } }

describe('Create Issue', options, () => {
  ...
})

```

3. Via the Cypress App, run both tests and use the _time travel_ functionality to go back to the steps where the API requests were executed to get visual _feedback_ from such calls with the help of the _lib_ `cypress-plugin-api`. In addition, also have _snapshots_ of the application under test, when executing commands via _GUI_.

</details>

---

Go to [lesson 7](./7.md) to test the _issue_ creation functionality, also via API calls.
